docs: How Renovate Works overview - Basic (#25108)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/key-concepts/how-renovate-works.md

---
title: How Renovate works
description: Learn how Renovate works
---

# Introduction

Renovate usually performs these steps:

- Cloning the repository
- Scanning package files to extract dependencies

> - Looking up registries to check for available updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Looking up registries to check for updates
```

- Applying any grouping rules defined
- Pushing branches and raising Pull Requests

> Because Renovate needs to support a lot of dependency naming and versioning conventions, it has modules for each known convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Renovate must support a lot of dependency naming and versioning conventions, it has modules for each known convention.
```

You can contribute your own modules, if you want.

## Modules

Renovate's modules are:

- [datasource](../modules/datasource/index.md)
- [manager](../modules/manager/index.md)
- [platform](../modules/platform/index.md)

> - [versioning](../modules/versioning.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [versioning](../modules/versioning.md)
```

Renovate uses these modules in order:

> 1. The platform module is used to interact with the source control platform and clone the repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The platform module interacts with the source control platform and clones the repository
```

3. The `docker` versioning returns `python:3.11-alpine`, because that version is compatible with `python:3.10-alpine`

# Workflow

Here's an overview of the workflow:

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph INITIALIZATION
        direction TB
        MC[Merge configurations \n most important to least: \n cli > env > file > default]
        MC --> IP[Initialize platform]
        IP --> AD[Query the platform for repositories]
        AD --> NFIL[Narrow the list with filters]
    end

    subgraph REPOSITORY
       direction TB
       FER{{For each repository}}

      subgraph EXTRACTD[EXTRACT DEPENDENCIES]
          direction TB
          CLBRANCH[Extract base branches]
          CLBRANCH --> VULN[Check for vulnerabilities]
          VULN --> CC{{For each manager}}
          CC -->|managerA| CD["..."]
          CC -->|managerB| CCF["match files"]
          CCF --> CFEF{{For each file}}
          CFEF -->|file1| CCD1[Extract dependency]
          CFEF -->|file2| CCD2[...]
      end

      subgraph LOOKUP[LOOK UP UPDATES]
          direction TB
          UC{{For each manager}}

>           UC -->|managerA| UD["..."]

Reviewer: Does Mermaid.js allow `manager A` and `manager B`? Like this:

```suggestion
          UC -->|manager A| UD["..."]
```

Author: Done

>     end
> 
>     subgraph REPOSITORY
>        direction TB
>        FER[[For each repository]]
> 
>       subgraph EXTRACTD[EXTRACT DEPENDENCIES]
>           direction TB
>           CLBRANCH[Extract base branches]
>           CLBRANCH --> VULN[Check for vulnerabilities]
>           VULN --> CC[[For each manager]]
>           CC -->|managerA| CD["..."]
>           CC -->|managerB| CCF["match files"]
>           CCF --> CFEF[[For each file]]
>           CFEF -->|file1| CCD1[Extract dependency]
>           CFEF -->|file2| CCD2[...]
>       end
> 
>       subgraph LOOKUP[LOOK UP UPDATES]
>           direction TB
>           UC[[For each manager]]
>           UC -->|managerA| UD["..."]
>           UC -->|managerB| UFEF[[For each file]]
>           UFEF -->|file1| FED[[For each dependency]]
>           UFEF -->|file2| FED2[...]
>           FED -->|dep1| D1[...]
>           D1 -..-> CU
>           FED -->|dep2| D2[use datasource to \n fetch versions]
>           D2 --> J[use versioning to find \n next valid update]
>           FED2 -...-> CU
>           UD -....-> CU
>           J --> CU[Look up updates]
>       end
> 
>       subgraph WRITEU[WRITE UPDATES]
>         direction TB
>         FEU[[For each update]]
>         FEU --> AUCOND[Check if branch needed: \n existing/rebase/concurrent amount]
>         AUCOND --> AU[Create branch\nApply update\nCreate PR]
>       end
> 
>       subgraph FINALIZE[FINALIZE]
>       direction TB
>         CM[Check for config migration]
>         CM --> CSB[Clean stale branches]
> 
>       end
> 
>       FER --> IRPO[Initialize repository]
> 
>       IRPO --> EXTRACTD
>       EXTRACTD --> LOOKUP
> 
>       LOOKUP --> WRITEU
> 
>       WRITEU --> FINALIZE
> 
>     end
> 
>     INITIALIZATION --> REPOSITORY

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flowchart TB
    subgraph INITIALIZATION
        direction TB
        MC[Merge configurations \n most important to least: \n cli > env > file > default]
        MC --> IP[Initialize platform]
        IP --> AD[Query the platform for repositories]
        AD --> NFIL[Narrow the list with filters]
    end

    subgraph REPOSITORY
       direction TB
       FER[For each repository]

      subgraph EXTRACTD[EXTRACT DEPENDENCIES]
          direction TB
          CLBRANCH[Extract base branches]
          CLBRANCH --> VULN[Check for vulnerabilities]
          VULN --> CC[For each manager]
          CC -->|managerA| CD["..."]
          CC -->|managerB| CCF["match files"]
          CCF --> CFEF[For each file]
          CFEF -->|file1| CCD1[Extract dependency]
          CFEF -->|file2| CCD2[...]
      end

      subgraph LOOKUP[LOOK UP UPDATES]
          direction TB
          UC[For each manager]
          UC -->|managerA| UD["..."]
          UC -->|managerB| UFEF[For each file]
          UFEF -->|file1| FED[For each dependency]
          UFEF -->|file2| FED2[...]
          FED -->|dep1| D1[...]
          D1 -..-> CU
          FED -->|dep2| D2[use datasource to \n fetch versions]
          D2 --> J[use versioning to find \n next valid update]
          FED2 -...-> CU
          UD -....-> CU
          J --> CU[Look up updates]
      end

      subgraph WRITEU[WRITE UPDATES]
        direction TB
        FEU[For each update]
        FEU --> AUCOND[Check if branch needed: \n existing/rebase/concurrent amount]
        AUCOND --> AU[Create branch\nApply update\nCreate PR]
      end

      subgraph FINALIZE[FINALIZE]
      direction TB
        CM[Check for config migration]
        CM --> CSB[Clean stale branches]

      end

      FER --> IRPO[Initialize repository]

      IRPO --> EXTRACTD
      EXTRACTD --> LOOKUP

      LOOKUP --> WRITEU

      WRITEU --> FINALIZE

    end

    INITIALIZATION --> REPOSITORY
```

Right now some boxes have a extra set of `[]` characters, like this: `[[For each ...]]`. I think it looks cleaner without the extra borders, so like this: `[For each ...]`.

This suggestion makes all the boxes look the same.

Author: It isn't "some box" but the boxes that mean "iteration over" 

You give through the simple boxes but the [[]] boxes parallelize the actions , I thought I was better to differentiate , let me know what you think about this

Reviewer: > You give through the simple boxes but the [[]] boxes parallelize the actions , I thought I was better to differentiate , let me know what you think about this

You're right that we should differentiate the boxes. But the `[[]]` box does not _feel_ very different to me.

The [Mermaid.js Flowcharts syntax, node shapes](https://mermaid.js.org/syntax/flowchart.html#node-shapes) shows examples of different node shapes. Can you try the [hexagon node](https://mermaid.js.org/syntax/flowchart.html#a-hexagon-node)? That feels different enough, and it's not too distracting, I hope. 😄

Author: Here it is https://github.com/azro352/renovate/blob/feat/how-does-work-basic/docs/usage/key-concepts/how-renovate-works.md

---
title: How Renovate works
description: Learn how Renovate works
---

# Introduction

> Renovate first finds all the dependencies in your repository, and then checks for updates to those dependencies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Renovate usually performs these steps:

- Clones the repo
- Scans package files to extract dependencies
- Looks up registries to check for available updates
- Applies any grouping rules defined
- Pushes branches and raises Pull Requests

```

Because Renovate needs to support a lot of dependency naming and versioning conventions, it has modules for each known convention.

> You can define your own modules, if you want.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can contribute your own modules, if you want.
```

> Please add comments to the [issue#25091](https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/issues/25091) if you wish to see a part (better) shown in the graph below
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This issue will be closed

## Modules

Renovate's modules are:

- [manager](../modules/manager/index.md)
- [datasource](../modules/datasource/index.md)
- [versioning](../modules/versioning.md).

Renovate uses these modules in order:

1. The manager module looks for files based on their name and extracts the dependencies (each dependency has a datasource)

> 2. The datasource module looks for the existing versions of the dependency

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The datasource module looks up versions of the dependency
```

> 3. the versioning module search for a valid version regarding the dependency's version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. the versioning module validates and sorts the returned versions
```

For example:

1. the `gitlabci` manager finds a dependency named `python:3.10-alpine` of datasource `docker`
2. the `docker` datasource looks for versions and finds `[python:3.9,python:3.9-alpine,python:3.10,python:3.10-alpine,python:3.11,python:3.11-alpine]`
3. the `docker` versioning takes `python:3.11-alpine` as it is compatible with `python:3.10-alpine`

# Workflow

## Basic

Here's a high-level overview of Renovate's workflow, where it collects dependencies and then updates them:

```mermaid
flowchart LR

>   subgraph COLLECT
>     direction TB
>     CC[[For each manager]]
>     CC -->|managerA| CD["..."]
>     CC -->|managerB| CCF["collect files"]
> 
>     CCF --> CFEF[[For each file]]
> 
>     CFEF -->|file1| CCD1[Collect dependency]
>     CFEF -->|file2| CCD2[...]
>   end

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  subgraph EXTRACT
    direction TB
    CC[[For each manager]]
    CC -->|managerA| CD["..."]
    CC -->|managerB| CCF["match files"]

    CCF --> CFEF[[For each file]]

    CFEF -->|file1| CCD1[Extract dependency]
    CFEF -->|file2| CCD2[...]
  end
```

  subgraph UPDATE
    direction TB

    UC[[For each manager]]
    UC -->|managerA| UD["..."]
    UC -->|managerB| UFEF[[For each file]]

    UFEF -->|file1| FED[[For each dependency]]
    UFEF -->|file2| FED2[...]

    FED -->|dep1| D1[...]
    D1 -..-> CU

>     FED -->|dep2| D2[use datasource to\n get possible updates]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    FED -->|dep2| D2[use datasource to\n fetch versions]
```

    D2 --> J[use versioning to find \n next valid update]

    FED2 -...-> CU

    UD -....-> CU
    J --> CU[Collect updates]

    CU --> FEU[[For each update]]

>     FEU --> AU[Create branch\nApply update\nSetup PR]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    FEU --> AU[Create branch\nApply update\nCreate PR]
```

---
title: How Renovate works
description: Learn how Renovate works
---

# Introduction

Renovate usually performs these steps:

- Clones the repo
- Scans package files to extract dependencies
- Looks up registries to check for available updates
- Applies any grouping rules defined
- Pushes branches and raises Pull Requests

Because Renovate needs to support a lot of dependency naming and versioning conventions, it has modules for each known convention.
You can contribute your own modules, if you want.

## Modules

Renovate's modules are:

- [manager](../modules/manager/index.md)
- [datasource](../modules/datasource/index.md)

> - [versioning](../modules/versioning.md).

Reviewer 2: Sort alphabetically, add platform too. We also need to make sure such links work when published to docs

Cc @HonkingGoose

Because Renovate needs to support a lot of dependency naming and versioning conventions, it has modules for each known convention.
You can contribute your own modules, if you want.

## Modules

Renovate's modules are:

- [datasource](../modules/datasource/index.md)
- [manager](../modules/manager/index.md)
- [platform](../modules/platform/index.md)
- [versioning](../modules/versioning.md).

Renovate uses these modules in order:

1. The platform module is used to interact with the source control platform and clone the repository
1. The manager module looks for files based on their name and extracts the dependencies (each dependency has a datasource)
1. The datasource module looks up versions of the dependency
1. The versioning module validates and sorts the returned versions

For example:

1. The `gitlabci` manager finds a dependency: `python:3.10-alpine` which has the `docker` datasource
2. The `docker` datasource looks for versions and finds: `[python:3.9,python:3.9-alpine,python:3.10,python:3.10-alpine,python:3.11,python:3.11-alpine]`
3. The `docker` versioning returns `python:3.11-alpine`, because that version is compatible with `python:3.10-alpine`

# Workflow

## Basic

> Here's a high-level overview of Renovate's workflow, where it collects dependencies and then updates them:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's a high-level overview of Renovate's workflow, where it extracts dependencies and then updates them:
```

    CFEF -->|file1| CCD1[Extract dependency]
    CFEF -->|file2| CCD2[...]
  end

  subgraph UPDATE
    direction TB

    UC[[For each manager]]
    UC -->|managerA| UD["..."]
    UC -->|managerB| UFEF[[For each file]]

    UFEF -->|file1| FED[[For each dependency]]
    UFEF -->|file2| FED2[...]

    FED -->|dep1| D1[...]
    D1 -..-> CU
    FED -->|dep2| D2[use datasource to\n fetch versions]
    D2 --> J[use versioning to find \n next valid update]

    FED2 -...-> CU

    UD -....-> CU
    J --> CU[Collect updates]

    CU --> FEU[[For each update]]

    FEU --> AU[Create branch\nApply update\nCreate PR]

  end

  EXTRACT --> UPDATE
```

## Advanced

Here's a detailed overview of the workflow:

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph INITIALIZATION
        direction TB
        MC[Merge configurations \n most important to least: \n cli > env > file > default]
        MC --> IP[Initialize platform]
        IP --> AD[Query the platform for repositories]
        AD --> NFIL[Narrow the list with filters]
    end

    subgraph REPOSITORY
       direction TB
       FER[[For each repository]]

      subgraph EXTRACTD[EXTRACT DEPENDENCIES]
          direction TB

>           CLBRANCH[Collect existing branches]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          CLBRANCH[Extract base branches]
```

          CLBRANCH --> VULN[Check for vulnerabilities]
          VULN --> CC[[For each manager]]
          CC -->|managerA| CD["..."]
          CC -->|managerB| CCF["match files"]
          CCF --> CFEF[[For each file]]
          CFEF -->|file1| CCD1[Extract dependency]
          CFEF -->|file2| CCD2[...]
      end

>       subgraph COLLECTU[COLLECT UPDATES]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      subgraph LOOKUP[LOOK UP UPDATES]
```

          direction TB
          UC[[For each manager]]
          UC -->|managerA| UD["..."]
          UC -->|managerB| UFEF[[For each file]]
          UFEF -->|file1| FED[[For each dependency]]
          UFEF -->|file2| FED2[...]
          FED -->|dep1| D1[...]
          D1 -..-> CU
          FED -->|dep2| D2[use datasource to \n fetch versions]
          D2 --> J[use versioning to find \n next valid update]
          FED2 -...-> CU
          UD -....-> CU

>           J --> CU[Collect updates]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          J --> CU[Look up updates]
```

      end

      subgraph WRITEU[WRITE UPDATES]
        direction TB
        FEU[[For each update]]
        FEU --> AUCOND[Check if branch needed: \n existing/rebase/concurrent amount]
        AUCOND --> AU[Create branch\nApply update\nCreate PR]
      end

      subgraph FINALIZE[FINALIZE]
      direction TB
        CM[Check for config migration]
        CM --> CSB[Clean stale branches]

      end

      FER --> IRPO[Initialize repository]

      IRPO --> EXTRACTD

>       EXTRACTD --> COLLECTU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      EXTRACTD --> LOOKUP
```

>       COLLECTU --> WRITEU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      LOOKUP --> WRITEU
```

---
title: How Renovate works
description: Learn how Renovate works
---

# Introduction

> Renovate usually performs these steps:
> 
> - Clones the repo
> - Scans package files to extract dependencies
> - Looks up registries to check for available updates
> - Applies any grouping rules defined
> - Pushes branches and raises Pull Requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Renovate usually performs these steps:

- Cloning the repository
- Scanning package files to extract dependencies
- Looking up registries to check for available updates
- Applying any grouping rules defined
- Pushing branches and raising Pull Requests
```

Because Renovate needs to support a lot of dependency naming and versioning conventions, it has modules for each known convention.
You can contribute your own modules, if you want.

## Modules

Renovate's modules are:

- [datasource](../modules/datasource/index.md)
- [manager](../modules/manager/index.md)
- [platform](../modules/platform/index.md)

> - [versioning](../modules/versioning.md).

Reviewer 2: @HonkingGoose @viceice should these drop the index.md so that they work in the online docs?

Reviewer: @rarkins I don't know, I usually mess up the links the first time round. I hope viceice knows. 🙂

Author: There are multiple cases where the link to `index.md` is done, and it works well

https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/blob/main/docs/usage/user-stories/maintaining-aur-packages-with-renovate.md?plain=1#L36

https://docs.renovatebot.com/user-stories/maintaining-aur-packages-with-renovate/

Reviewer 3: the link needs to point to the markdown file to not get warnings from mkdocs

Renovate uses these modules in order:

1. The manager module looks for files based on their name and extracts the dependencies (each dependency has a datasource)
2. The datasource module looks up versions of the dependency
3. The versioning module validates and sorts the returned versions

The platform handles the interaction with the remote repositories, for example creating the PRs.

For example:

> 1. the `gitlabci` manager finds a dependency named `python:3.10-alpine` of datasource `docker`
> 2. the `docker` datasource looks for versions and finds `[python:3.9,python:3.9-alpine,python:3.10,python:3.10-alpine,python:3.11,python:3.11-alpine]`
> 3. the `docker` versioning takes `python:3.11-alpine` as it is compatible with `python:3.10-alpine`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The `gitlabci` manager finds a dependency named `python:3.10-alpine` of datasource `docker`
2. The `docker` datasource looks for versions and finds `[python:3.9,python:3.9-alpine,python:3.10,python:3.10-alpine,python:3.11,python:3.11-alpine]`
3. The `docker` versioning takes `python:3.11-alpine` as it is compatible with `python:3.10-alpine`
```

Let's capitalize the beginning of the sentence, so we're consistent in the docs.
